.\"
.\" DI $Id: tchars.tr,v 0.9 2014/03/22 20:13:23 pj Exp pj $
.\" DA Pierre‐Jean Fichet
.\" DS Utroff tchars manual
.\" DT Utroff tchars manual
.\" DK utroff tchars troff nroff heirloom tmac xml
.ig
Copyright (C) 2012-2018 Pierre Jean Fichet
<pierrejean dot fichet at posteo dot net>

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
..
.
.
.
.TH TCHARS 1 '2018‐04‐10'
.
.
.
.SH NAME
.PP
\fBTchars\fR - Translate characters for Troff.
.
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\fB@BINDIR@/tchars\fR
[\fB-e\fR]
\fIfile\fR
.
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fITchars\fR is a troff pre‐processor which translate some
ascii code to complex utf‐8 characters. Actually, it can
only translate a subset of betacode to polytonic greek.
.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\&\fB-e\fR
Escape characters: print troff utf‐8 escape sequence in the
form of \fB\EeU’xxxx’\fR instead of printing the utf‐8
character itself.
.
.
.
.SS MACROS
.RS 3
.PP
In the troff document, characters that has to be translated
must be indicated by one of the following macros:
.TP
\&\fBCW\fR \fIcode after before\fR
Transalte \fIcode\fR, and append \fIbefore\fR and
\fIafter\fR just before and after the translation.
.TP
\&\fBCL\fR \fIcode\fR \fB[\fR\fIcode...\fR\fB]\fR
Translate the whole line following \fBCL\fR.
.TP
\&\fBCS\fR
Begin a block that has to be translated. Must be followed by
\fBCE\fR.
.TP
\&\fBCE\fR
Close a block that has to be translated.
.PP
For \fItchars\fR to work, you must define these macro to
call a font which contain polytonic greek characters, as
follow, for example:
.PP
.EX
\fB.\fR\fBfp\fR 0 G GFSPyrsos otf \fI\Ee" Pyrsos from Greek Font Society\fR
\fB.\fR\fBde\fR \fBCW\fR
\fI\Ee\fR\fB\Ee$3\fR\fB\EefG\fR\fI\Ee\fR\fB\Ee$1\fR\fB\EefR\fR\fI\Ee\fR\fB\Ee$2\fR
\fB.\fR\fB.\fR
\fB.\fR\fBde\fR \fBCL\fR
\fB\EefG\fR\fI\Ee\fR\fB\Ee$*\fR\fB\EefR\fR
\fB.\fR\fB.\fR
\fB.\fR\fBde\fR \fBCS\fR
\fB.\fR \fBft\fR G
\fB.\fR\fB.\fR
\fB.\fR\fBde\fR \fBCE\fR
\fB.\fR \fBft\fR R
\fB.\fR\fB.\fR
.EE
.
.
.
.SS CODE
.RS 3
.PP
A rune is composed of an ascii letter, followed by a
representation of an accent.
\fITchars\fR actually understand the following accents:
.TP
\&+ dialytika ̈
.TP
\&& macron ̄
.TP
\&' vrachy ̆
.TP
\&) psili ̓
.TP
\&( dasia ̔
.TP
\&\Ee varia ̀
.TP
\&/ oxia ́
.TP
\&= perispomeni ͂
.TP
\&| ypogegrammeni ͅ
.PP
The order is significant, it
must be: \fB+&’)(\Ee/=|\fR
.PP
\fITchars\fR actually understand the following letters:
.TP
\&A Α ALPHA, a α alpha
.TP
\&B Β BETA, b β beta
.TP
\&C Ξ XI, c ξ xi
.TP
\&D Δ DELTA, d δ delta
.TP
\&E Ἑ EPSILON, e ε epsilon
.TP
\&F Φ PHI, f φ phi
.TP
\&G Γ GAMMA, g γ gamma
.TP
\&H Η ETA, h η eta
.TP
\&I Ι IOTA, i ι iota
.TP
\&K Κ KAPPA, k κ kappa
.TP
\&L Λ LAMBDA, l λ lambda
.TP
\&M Μ MU, m μ mu
.TP
\&N Ν NU, n ν nu
.TP
\&O Ο OMICRON, o ο omicron
.TP
\&P Π PI, p π pi
.TP
\&R Ρ RHO, r ρ rhô
.TP
\&S Σ SIGMA, s σ sigma
.TP
\&T Τ TAU, t τ tau
.TP
\&U Υ UPSILON, u υ upsilon
.TP
\&W Ω OMEGA, w ω omega
.TP
\&X Χ CHI, x χ chi
.TP
\&Y Ψ PSI, y ψ psi
.TP
\&Z Ζ ZETA, z ζ zeta
.
.
.
.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
.EX
The word physis in polytonic greek is written:
\fB.\fR\fBCW\fR fu/sis .
.EE
.
.
.
.SH FILES
.PP
\fI@BINDIR@/tchars\fR
.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\&utmac(7)
.
.
.
.SH LICENSE
.PP
\fITchars\fR and this man page are distributed the ISC license.
.
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Pierre‐Jean Fichet.
